-In this section,
we will learn about DNS.
This is followed by a hands-on lab.
Then we will look at basic
networking concepts such as
switching, routing, and gateways,
followed by another lab.
Finally,
we will see a standard network
troubleshooting technique in action
while we try to figure out why the URL
for the software repo
is not accessible.
Let's take an example.
We have two computers, A and B,
both are part of the same network
and they have been assigned with IP
addresses, 192.168.1.10 and 1.11.
To check the connectivity between
the two servers, you can run a ping
command on one computer to the other
using the other
computer's IP address.
You know that System B has database
services on them, so instead of having
to remember the IP address of System
B, you decide to give it a name, db.
Going forward,
you would like to ping system
B using the name db
instead of its IP address.
If you tried to ping db now,
you would see
that host A is unaware
of a host named db.
How do you fix that?
Basically, you want to tell
System A that the system
B had IP address 192.168.1.11
has a name db.
You want to tell System A that when
I say db,
I mean the IP 192.168.1.11.
You can do that by adding an entry
into the /etc/hosts file on system A.
Mention the IP address and the name
you want your host
to see System B as.
Ping to db.
Now get sent to the correct
IP and are successful.
Now there is an important
point to note there.
We told System A that the IP
at 192.168.1.11 is a host named db.
Host A takes that for granted.
Whatever we put in the /etc/hosts
file is the source
of truth for host A but that
need not be the truth.
Host A does not check to make sure
of System B's actual name is db.
For instance, running
a hostname command on System B
reveals that it is named
host-2 but host A doesn't care.
It goes by what's
in the host's file.
You can even fool system A into
believing that System B is google.
Just add an entry into the hosts
file with an IP mapping to
www.google.com.
Then ping google and you will
get a response from System B.
We have two names pointing
to the same system.
One is db and another
is google and we can
use either name to reach System B.
You can have as many
names as you want for as
many servers as you want
in the etc hosts file.
Every time we reference another
host by its name from Host
A through a ping command
or the SSH command or through any
of the applications or tools
within the system, it looks into
its /etc/hosts file to find out
the IP address of that host.
Translating hostname to IP address
this way is known as Name Resolution.
Ping may not always be
a good command to test DNS
resolution, especially if ping
is disabled on the other host.
In that case,
nslookup and dig can come in handy.
We will just stick with ping
for the rest of this video.
Within a small network of few
systems, you can easily
get away with the entries
in the /etc/hosts file.
On each system,
I specify which are the other systems
in the environment, and that's
how it was done in the past.
Until the environment grew
and these files got filled
with too many entries and managing
these became too hard.
If one of the servers' IP changed,
you would
need to modify the entries
in all of these hosts.
That's where we decided
to move all these entries
into a single server that
will manage it centrally.
We call that our DNS server.
Then, we point all hosts to look
up that server if they need to
resolve a hostname to an IP address
instead of its own /etc/hosts file.
How do we do that?
How do we point our host
to a DNS server?
Our DNS server
has the IP 192.168.1.100.
Every host has a DNS resolution
configuration file at /etc/resolv.conf.
You add an entry into it specifying
the address of the DNS server.
We say nameserver and point it to
192.168.1.100 and that should be it.
Once this is configured
on all of your
hosts,
every time a host comes across
a hostname that
it does not know about,
it looks it up from the DNS server.
If the IP of any of the hosts
was to change, simply update the DNS
server and all hosts should resolve
the new IP address going forward.
You no longer need any entries
in the hosts file
in any of the hosts,
but that does not mean you can't
have entries in hosts file.
You still can.
For example,
say you were to provision
a test server for your own needs.
You don't think others would
need to resolve this server
by its name, so it need not
be added to the DNS server.
In that case,
you can add an entry into
your hosts file to
resolve this server.
You can now resolve this server.
However, no other system
will be able to do that.
A system is able to use
hostname to IP mapping from
the hosts file locally as well
as from a remote DNS server.
What if you have an entry
in both places?
One in your hosts file
and another in DNS?
I have an entry in my
local files set to
192.168.1.115 and someone
added an entry for the same host to
192.168.1.116 on the DNS server.
In that case,
the host first looks in the local
/etc/hosts file and then
looks at the nameserver.
If it finds the entry in the local
hosts file, it uses that.
If not, it looks for that
host in the DNS server.
That order can be changed.
The order is defined by an entry
in the file /etc/nsswitch.conf
align with the hosts entry.
As you can see, the order is first
files and then followed by DNS.
Files refers to /etc/hosts file
and DNS refers to the DNS server.
For every hostname, the host first
looks into the local hosts file
and if it cannot find it there,
it then looks at the DNS server.
This order can be modified by
editing this entry in the file.
As per this order, our host would
resolve the test server
to 192.168.1.115.
Finally, what if you try to ping
a server that is not on either list?
For example,
I try and ping www.facebook.com.
I don't have facebook.com
in my /etc/hosts file
and I don't have it in my
DNS server either.
So in that case, it will fail.
You can add another entry
into your hosts resolv.conf
file to point to a nameserver
that knows Facebook.
8.8.8.8 is a public nameserver
available on the internet
hosted by Google that knows about
all websites on the internet.
You can have multiple nameservers
like this configured on your hosts,
but then you will have to configure
that on all hosts in your network.
You already have a nameserver within
your network configured on all hosts.
In that case, you can configure
the DNS server itself to forward
any unknown host names to the public
nameserver on the internet.
You should now be able to ping
external sites such as facebook.com.
Until now,
we have just been trying to reach
systems with their names like web,
db, NFS, etc.
We just pinged Facebook
as www.facebook.com.
How does that work?
What is this name with
a www and .com at the end?
It's called a domain name.
It is how IPs
translate to names that
we can remember
on the public internet.
Just like how we did for our hosts.
Now the reason they are in this
format separated
by dots is to group
similar things together.
The last portion of the domain name,
the .com, .net, .edu, .org, etc.
are the top-level domains.
They represent the intent
of the website, .com
for commercial or general purpose,
.net for network
or general purpose,
.edu for education
organizations, .org
for nonprofit organizations, etc.
Let's look at one in particular,
in Google's case,
the dot is the root.
That's where everything starts.
.com is the top-level domain.
Google is the domain name assigned
to Google and www is a sub domain.
The sub domains help in further
grouping things
together under Google.
For example,
Google's map service is available
@maps.google.com,
so maps is a subdomain.
Google's storage service
is available @drive.google.com.
Mobile apps are available
@apps.google.com.
Google's email services
are available @mail.google.com, etc.
You can further divide
each of these into
as many sub domains
based on your needs.
You begin to see a tree
structure forming.
When you try to reach
any of these domain
names,
say apps.google.com from within
your organization,
your request first hits
your organization's
internal DNS server.
It doesn't know who
apps or Google is,
so it forwards your
request to the internet.
On the internet, the IP address
of the server serving apps.google.com
may be resolved with the help
of multiple DNS servers.
A root DNS server
looks at your request
and point you to a DNS
server serving .com.
A .com DNS server looks at your
request and forwards you to Google
and Google's DNS server
provides you the IP
of the server serving applications.
In order to speed up
all future results,
your organization's
DNS server may choose
to cache this IP
for a period of time,
typically a few seconds
up to a few minutes.
That way, it doesn't have to go
through the whole process again.
That was out in public--
What about your organization?
Your organization can
have a similar structure too.
For example,
your organization could be called
mycompany.com and have multiple
subdomains for each purpose.
The www for an external-facing
website,
mail.mycompany.com for accessing
your organization's mail.
Drive for accessing storage,
pay.mycompany.com for accessing
the payroll application,
HR for accessing HR application, etc.
All of these are configured in your
organization's internal DNS server.
The reason we discussed all
of these is to understand
another entry
in the /etc/resolv.conf file.
Remember,
this is the file where we configured
the DNS server to be
used for our host.
With that, we were able to resolve
servers in our organization
with just their names,
like the web server.
We have now introduced
more standard domains
like web.my.company.com
or db.mycompany.com.
Now when you ping web,
you can no longer get a response.
Of course, this is because
we are trying to ping web
but there is no record by
the name web on my DNS server.
Instead, it is web.mycompany.com
so you have to use web.mycompany.com.
Now I can understand if someone
outside our company wants to
access our web server, he would
have to use web.mycompany.com.
But within your company, your own
company, you want to simply address
the web server by its first name,
web, just like how you address other
members in your family simply by their
first names, which is not the case
when someone outside your family
addresses them using their full names.
What do you do to configure web
to resolve web.mycompany.com.
You want to say when I say web,
I mean web.mycompany.com.
For that, you make an entry into
your hosts /etc/resolv.conf file
called search and specify
the domain name you want to append.
Next time you try to ping web,
you will
see it actually tries,
web.mycompany.com.
Now your host is intelligent
enough to exclude the search
domain if you specify the domain
in your query like this.
You may also provide additional
search domains like this
so it would mean when I saw web,
I mean web.mycompany.com
or web.prod.mycompany.com
or web.apps.mycompany.com
etcetera.Your host would try
searching all of these domain names.
Finally, a word about record types.
How are the records
stored in the DNS server?
We know that it stores
IP to host names.
That's known as A records.
Storing ipv6 to hostnames
is known as quad A records,
mapping one name to another
name is called CNAME records.
For example, you may have multiple
aliases for the same application,
like a food delivery service that
can be reached at eat Or hungry.
That's where a CNAME record is used.
Name to name mapping.
There are many more,
but these should be
enough to get us
through this section.
Ping may not always be
the right tool to test DNS
resolution, there are a few
other tools such as nslookup.
You can use nslookup to query
a hostname from a DNS server.
But remember,
nslookup does not consider
the entries in the local
/etc/ hosts file.
The same goes for dig.
Dig is another useful tool
to test DNS name resolution.
It returns more details in a similar
form as is stored on the server.
In the upcoming practice
exercises section, you will
practice viewing,
configuring and troubleshooting
DNS in a lab environment
on actual systems
through some fun
and challenging exercises.